---
title: 'Theoretical Research in Deep Learning'
date: 2018-09-12
permalink: /posts/2018/09/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Deep Learning
  - Theoretical work
---

This post contains some guidelines (gathered from self experience and also from some highly experienced people) for doing theoretical research in the AI field, strictly for newbies!

In my Dual Degree Project (essentially my Master's Thesis), I am working on some fundamental theoretical aspects of deep learning. Given that all my advisor's PhD students are working on application based topics, my advsior was very keen on having new students work on some mathematical topics related to deep learning. And I couldn't be any happier! 

Before anyone ventures into the theoretical field of deep learning, a word of caution - it is **NOT** at all easy to make significant contributions in this field! One must have a really solid mathematical background (and skills!) as well as the patience to go through several highly non-trivial (and very often extremely arduous) papers. But if you are up for the up challenge, it should be really enjoyable.

First of all, you have to refer to several theoretical papers from top AI conferences like ICML, NIPS, ICLR etc. since every year, there are tons of excellent (and dare I say paradigm altering!) theoretical papers published in these conferences. The papers in NIPS and ICML are not restricted to just deep learning and encompass several other domains, whereas ICLR is a bit more deep learning centred. Nevertheless, the quality of the theoretical papers is very high in all these conferences. The papers published in these top conferences give you a good idea of what are the theoretical problems of current relevance or importance in the AI community. In my case, I started off by skimming through the list of papers published in ICML 2017 and ICLR 2018. I glanced through the list of accepted papers and only looked at the abstracts of the ones whose title seemed interesting enough to me. This saves you a lot of time as the list is just huge. I mainly looked at papers on the expressive power of neural networks (ICLR 2018 had loads of them!) and the ones on optimization in general. So you could also choose some specific topics which you prefer. 

Once you have referred to several (the quantification of 'several' is subjective) papers, you have to find gaps in the existing work or a significant extension of some one else's work that ("to the best of your knowledge") has not been attempted so far. A potential problem here can be struggling to come up with new ideas. It happened to me as well. Talk to your advisor or any acquaintance who is actively involved in theoretical work about this. Often they can suggest you good ideas (due to their experience) or some other direction all together, which they are very optimistic about.

Now that you have some really cool ideas, it is imperative that you do a thorough literature survey specific to your topic, in order to ascertain whether your idea has already not been published by other smart people. I say this from personal experience. In my fourth year, I sat up all night conceiving a really nice algorithm and its proof based on some ideas I had read up somewhere else, only to find out a week later (and that too after emailing it to my guide) that it was already published somewhere else! It was very disheartening and also a massive waste of time. Also it may happen that some guys have come up with something better than your idea, but you are not aware of it due to insufficient literature survey or in my case, because it just got published days before my submission deadline! So always be on the lookout for similar papers (i.e papers related to your topic), especially if you are working on something very recent.

Once you are sure that your super cool idea is completely novel, start writing it down properly. For instance, I just get way too carried away with ideas in my mind. It is only when I start writing them down properly, problems begin to show up! Also hand-wavy arguments are an absolute no-no in theoretical papers. I recommend writing it down in the form of a paper only (here I'm assuming that your ultimate goal is to get a publication), because doing so forces you to write each and every step properly and clearly, which will help you identify/spot the sketchy areas of your proofs etc. After writing it down properly, have your advisor and any math inclined person read all of it carefully. You do not want to put something incorrect in your paper! But more than the math itself, your paper should be lucid enough for other people to understand. Please realize that your idea comes off as completely new to them, and if it's not presented well enough, you might not get favourable reviews/responses even though your idea is brilliant. So presentation plays a key role in theoretical papers. My advisor told me all of this, since the initial draft of my paper made very little sense to him. Needless to say, paper writing is a highly iterative process. You have to make so many changes as you get it reviewed by others. Usually the final draft of your paper will significantly differ from your initial draft.

I hope these guidelines will serve useful to some of you. Best of luck!
